---
layout: post
title: Memories
categories: blog
tags: ['human behaviour']
excerpt: 'A quick note on memories'
date: May 13, 2017

author: self

---

When I was about 8 years old, one evening I got a severe deep cut on
one of my legs. My father provided me with first aid and dressed up
the wound. A few hours later I was running around with the bandage
somehow managing to hold on to my leg, not that I cared much about it.

As the wound healed and left a scar behind it, I would show it off
very proudly whenever a chance presented itself. I was always able
to locate the scar without having to look at it. But, as the years
passed by, the frequency with which I spoke about it decreased along
with my ability to be able to find it in my sleep. Today, the scar is
barely visible and I am not certain if it was the left leg or the
right. Probably the right leg.

Memories feel very similar. We distinctly remember the events related
to a memory and every little detail, including the people, the place
and the time. We often reflect on the important memories. Very
frequently. But as the years roll on, the details start to get hazy
and we can't point out the minute details quite as efficiently. Surely
with some digging and retrospection the details start coming back to
us, but it takes a little more effort on our part and a tad bit longer
the next time we try reminiscing upon a certain memory. Over time, we
think about it less often and eventually it gets muddled up with the
forgotten sands to an extent that we are unable to point out the
difference anymore.

I used this analogy recently to explain what a memory is and how it
plays tricks on us and felt the need to write it down.

As I bend down to search for the wound I had got years ago, I finally
manage to find it hidden under the hair that grows on top of it
now. But it is on my left leg.
